hello everybody and welcome back so in
this video we're gonna be talking about
threading so it's actually the
introduction to this reading in Python
tutorial series in this video I will
warn you we're not actually gonna be
doing any coding we're just gonna be
talking about the theory so what is a
thread how do we run threads what's the
difference between threads and processes
and really understanding why we even
need to use these things so I'm just
gonna warn you if you don't understand
that please don't skip forward to the
next video because there's no point in
learning threading unless you understand
what the heck it actually is so I'm
gonna hop onto the whiteboard now and
we'll get started and talk about what is
a thread what is threading and why do we
use it okay so what I'm drawn on the
screen right now is kind of a classic
processor in 2020 we have 4 cores which
are all these red boxes here that I'm
kind of drawing on and then the actual
black box that's a note it by CPU is the
entire central processing unit so back
in the old days we used to have
processors that just had one processing
core now we have processors with 4 cores
8 cores 2 cores 16 cores 32 cores and it
goes pretty crazy right so computing has
expanded a ton now the reason I'm
starting with this is because we
actually need to understand how our
processor works to understand what a
thread is and why we have you know
thousands of them and why we create them
in our programs so the idea here is that
the amount of cores you have on your
processor is the amount of things that
can happen at the exact same time yes
that's what I mean if we're talking
about actual time you know like theory
of relativity whatever you want to put
it out if we have four cores that means
at any point in time we can do at most
four operations at the exact same time
and these operations are really
low-level computational operations there
so you know millions of them happening a
second but in these tiny nano seconds
that it takes to do an operation we can
only do four of them at the same time
because we have four cores and this is
called parallelism if we have multiple
things happening at the exact same time
then that is a parallel operation right
we can think about like if we have four
roads and we have four cars driving on
these roads right moving
at the same time they're driving
parallel to each other at the same time
whereas if I have you know a bunch of
cars beside each other on the same road
or a bunch of cars behind each other
they can only go as fast as the car in
front of them right or they need to wait
for the car in front of them to get off
the road before they can start driving
on it right and that's kind of the idea
so we'll use some examples like this to
make things more clear but just
understand that the amount of cores in
your processor really matters right and
when we think about clock speed so if we
have something like 2.6 gigahertz is the
clock speed of your processor what that
means is each one of your cores can run
at 2.6 gigahertz so each one of those
cores is able to do 2.6 I think it's
like million operations per second or
you know something along those lines I
don't know what the conversion rate is
and that means you can do 2.6 times 4
operations per second because each one
of these cores is running at that clock
speed and the clock speed is essentially
kind of an electron or a wire going on
and off on and off on and off and that
allows your computer to do operations so
that's kind of the background here we
have central processing units those
central processing units are made up of
course the amount of cores you have
denotes the amount of parallel
operations that can happen at the same
time now obviously we know that we're
doing more than four operations right
you know like in our computer we're
gonna do more than four operations so
how do we do all these operations and
how do we schedule when they happen well
that's where we talk about threads and
we talk about multi processing so a
thread is essentially one program or one
set of operations that needs to happen
so every thread is going to be assigned
to one core so all of these cores that
we have here will have a bunch of
different threads that they're going to
be executing and switching between which
ones they perform operations on so if we
say that like this line actually I'm
gonna draw in another color so that it's
a little bit better let's say this blue
line is a thread and this other blue
line is a thread and our processor are a
processor core can only do one thing at
a time and it has both these threads
that it's assigned to what that means is
that it needs to find a way where it can
do some operations on this thread and
can switch right and do some operations
on this thread and this is what
threading is it's essentially how do we
determine when to run different things
on the same CPU core yes we can have
threads running on different cores
obviously you know this core itself is
gonna happen its own threads that are
running on it this core will have its
own threads but threading does not
involve running on multiple cores all it
involves is creating some program or
some operations some function something
that's going to be executing in a
different sequence than another thing so
if we have two threads you know then we
can draw these two lines here let's say
okay we have these two different things
they both need to happen now we tell our
CPU you know figure out which one we're
gonna do and what's happening on our
computer and we can actually look at the
amount of threads and I'll do that I'm
here to show you guys if we go to task
manager and we go to performance we
should see that we have 1854 threads
running and you can see that the bottom
and 173 different processes so what that
means is that between the four cores on
my computer you can see it's running a
little bit under 4.2 gigahertz we can
run at most four threads at once because
we have four cores and all those other
threads are just being switched between
on the CPU cores so all these different
operations are happening you know
milliseconds after each other and this
is the idea behind threading is that
we're not necessarily doing things in
parallel at the same time we're just
changing the order in which we do
specific operations so why would we even
want to do that what's the point of
making multiple threads if we can't do
things at the same time well sometimes a
thread does what's called hanging or it
stops or he doesn't need to actually be
executing at the current time so our
processor core can kind of turn around
and execute another thread well this one
say is waiting right so while one
threads waiting for something to happen
maybe the user to press a key maybe for
you know some network thing to send a
file we don't need to be just stuck
waiting for this thread our processor
core can kind of chain gears it can
shift to the left and it can execute
another thread while that one's waiting
so this is the point with threading and
this is called concurrent programming
not when we're doing
things in parallel at the exact same
time but when we're doing things in
different timing sequences so we can
have multiple threads running at the
same time and our one CPU core that
we're running this these threads on is
switching between these threads in its
execution chain right so I'm gonna erase
this and we're gonna go down to a one
core model now because this is kind of
showing you how the entire CPU works as
a whole right there's all these threads
they get distributed between the cores
and then they run on those cores these
cores can only do one thing at a time
there's four of them that means we can
do four things at a time in total so
these cores will switch what they're
gonna be doing based on the threads that
they have so let's do a one core model
now so I'm gonna just draw one CPU core
now and show you kind of the difference
between what happens if we run something
in one thread versus running it and say
two or three and why we would even do
that so let's say we just have a basic
Python application and we want to print
one we want to time dot sleep say 10
seconds right so we'll just put 10
seconds this is just pseudocode don't
really worry about the syntax too much
and then we want to print the value too
now if we were running this in one
thread so let's draw our CPU let's make
this like orange red box this will be
our our core so let's write this is a
core and we put our 1 thread so we'll
say this like here well let's just put
you know maybe a label for this we'll
say that's like t1 so thread 1 and this
will be thread 1 so for us to run this
program and to see the output of one and
see the output of 2 this is gonna take
us a little bit over 10 seconds right
because we need to print 1 then we need
to wait for 10 seconds and then we need
to print 2 so we can imagine it's not
gonna take much longer than 10 seconds
but a tiny bit more it's gonna take
longer than that right so for us to get
that output takes 10 seconds now if I
distribute this into 2 threads where
what I do is in thread 1 I leave what I
have there but in thread to so in t2
like this and we'll do a little bit
better here well print the value of 2 if
I do this and now I throw my t2 over
here going in my core so both these
threads are running on this same core
which means again only one thing can
happen at a time what we can do now is
say ok
so we'll print one cuz we're gonna start
that thread one in our program but then
when we hit this sleep so let's just say
one's out put it here we don't actually
need to wait for this entire sleep to
happen what we can do is we can say okay
so since this thread isn't doing
anything right now the core doesn't have
any operations to perform we're not
adding we're not subtracting we're just
merely waiting I don't need to just
stall and hang on this thread in fact
what I can do is almost think of it like
rotate the core over or you know pass
another thread to the core we can go
over to thread two and just print the
value two immediately because the thing
is if thread one is sleeping we don't
need to wait for it we can just go to
another thread do something there and
then once this thread finishes executing
or finishes sleeping or waiting we can
go back to it and we can execute the
rest say so we had like print three
under here the output from our program
with these two threads would be one we
would sleep so we would go to thread two
we finish thread two we'd go back to
thread one we'd wait for it to finish
sleeping and then we'd output the value
three and this is the idea right and
threads are really useful in web
applications or when you're doing like
online games and stuff because you don't
want to pause the entire screen while
you wait to receive like a few megabytes
of data from the server in fact what you
want to do is have all of the things
that are like server related commands
running in a thread so that while you're
waiting for the server to return a
response to you your whole game doesn't
just freeze you can have these threads
so that it is going in between these two
different threads so you know one thread
is handling getting the messages and
stuff from the server and the other
thread is handling actually displaying
the graphics to you as a user so you're
playing a video game right so then as
soon as the thread from the servers are
ready to receive and ready to start
working okay it'll switch to that it'll
get the information and then you can
translate that to the graphics thread
which will start out what do you call it
displaying to the screen or like
updating the screen right so that's the
idea with these threads now a lot of
applications are multi processed which
means a little bit more complicated to
do they have their threads running on
different CPU cores at the same time but
we're not gonna get into that for this
tutorial because that's a little bit
more complicated advanced just
understand that if we're waiting for
something to happen in one thread we
will switch to the other thread or the
other threads because there may be many
execute those as much as we can and then
go back to the original thread when it
stops waiting so that's the idea that's
my explanation of threads and processes
and I hope with that you guys have a
good understanding and are ready to move
on to programming and getting into
threads and python in the next video